Added an IPAM Migration Guide for users upgrading to Nautobot 2.0. (#4151)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/user-guide/administration/upgrading/from-v1/ipam-upgrade-guide.md

# Nautobot 2.0 IPAM Migration Guide

## Goal

This document aims to answer the question “What do I need to do to my data (or what changes with my data) when migrating to 2.0, specifically IPAM?”

## What Changed

This section details the high-level changes as it relates to the data modeling for IPAM objects. Some of the sections are repeating content found in the release notes with detail added for improved readability. Additionally, not all changes described will be distinctly related to IPAM, but if there were changes to relationships to or from IPAM data models, their impact will be described here.

### Namespaces were introduced

The new `Namespace` model expands on the functionality previously provided by `VRF.enforce_unique` and the `ENFORCE_GLOBAL_UNIQUE` setting, both of which have now been removed. Within a Namespace, all VRFs, Prefixes, and IP addresses must be unique. This enables greater flexibility in managing discrete duplicate `Prefix` or `IPAddress` objects, asserting that each set of duplicates will be in a distinct `Namespace`.

> For more details please refer to the [documentation](https://docs.nautobot.com/projects/core/en/next/user-guide/core-data-model/ipam/namespace/).

Reviewer: Change to relative link?
```suggestion
For more details please refer to the [Namespace model documentation](../../../core-data-model/ipam/namespace.md).
```

A default `Namespace` object named "Global" wil be created for you. After upgrading, any duplicate objects that were identified will be moved to one or more "Cleanup" Namespaces.

For VRF objects that had `enforce_unique` enabled, any prefixes or child IPAddresses assigned to those Prefixes will be moved to a "VRF Namespace" with the name of the VRF included.

### Aggregate model was merged into Prefix

The `Aggregate` model will be removed and all existing aggregates will be migrated to `Prefix` with type set to `Container`. The `Aggregate.date_added` field will be migrated to `Prefix.date_allocated` and changed from a `Date` field to a `DateTime` field with the time set to `00:00`. The fields `Aggregate.tenant`, `Aggregate.rir`, and `Aggregate.description` will be migrated over to the same fields on `Prefix`.

> See the [upgrade guide](https://docs.nautobot.com/projects/core/en/next/user-guide/administration/upgrading/from-v1/upgrading-from-nautobot-v1/#aggregate-migrated-to-prefix) for more details on the data migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [upgrade guide](./upgrading-from-nautobot-v1.md#aggregate-migrated-to-prefix) for more details on the data migration.
```

### Role model is now Generic across Nautobot

The `DeviceRole`, `RackRole`, `ipam.Role`, and `IPAddressRoleChoices` have all been removed and replaced with a `extras.Role` model, This means that all references to any of the replaced models and choices now points to this generic `Role` model.

> In addition, the `role` field of the `IPAddress` model will be changed from a choice field to a foreign key field related to the `extras.Role` model.

Reviewer: Would be good to add a link to the Role model docs

As a result of this change, it is no longer necessary nor possible to disable tree hierarchy using `settings.DISABLE_PREFIX_LIST_HIERARCHY` as this setting has been removed. Additionally it is no longer possible to disable global uniqueness using `settings.ENFORCE_GLOBAL_UNIQUE` as this setting has been removed.

#### Prefix Parenting Guidance

The following guidance has been added for the `Prefix` model in order to ensure more accurate network modeling:

- A `Prefix` of type `Container` should only have a parent (if any) of type `Container`
- A `Prefix` of type `Network` should only have a parent (if any) of type `Container`
- A `Prefix` of type `Pool` should only have a parent (if any) of type `Network`
- Any `Prefix` can be a root prefix (i.e. have no parent)

In Nautobot 2.0, creating or updating prefixes that violate this guidance will result in a warning; in a future Nautobot release this will be changed to an enforced data constraint.

### Prefix.is_pool field and "Container" status replaced by new field Prefix.type

> A new type field was added to `Prefix` to replace the `is_poo`l boolean field and the "Container" status. The `type` field can be set to "Network", "Pool" or "Container", with "Network" being the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new type field was added to `Prefix` to replace the `is_pool` boolean field and the "Container" status. The `type` field can be set to "Network", "Pool" or "Container", with "Network" being the default.
```

Existing prefixes with a status of "Container" will be migrated to the "Container" `type`. Existing prefixes with `is_pool` set is migrated to the "Pool" `type`. Prefixes with both `is_pool set` and a status of "Container" are migrated to the "Pool" `type`.

> The "Container" status will be removed and all prefixes will be migrated to the "Active" status if it exists. If the"Active" status was deleted, prefixes will be migrated to the first available prefix status in the database that is not"Container".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "Container" status will be removed and all prefixes will be migrated to the "Active" status if it exists. If the "Active" status does not exist, prefixes will instead be migrated to the first available prefix status in the database that is not "Container".
```

#### Example

- 192.168.0.0/16          `Container - 1024/65536 utilization`
    - 192.168.1.0/24      `Network - 1/254 utilization`
        - 192.168.1.1     `IP Address`
    - 192.168.2.0/24      `Network - 4/256 utilization`
        - 192.168.2.0/30  `Pool - 1/4 utilization`
            - 192.168.2.1 `IP Address`
    - 192.168.3.0/24      `Network - 5/254 utilization`
        - 192.168.3.1     `IP Address`
        - 192.168.3.64/30 `Pool - 0/4 utilization`
    - 192.168.4.0/24      `Network - 1/256 utilization`
        - 192.168.4.255   `IP Address`

### IPAddress Parenting Concrete Relationship was added

The `ipam.IPAddress` model has been modified to have a mandatory foreign key to `ipam.Prefix` as the `parent` field. Parenting of IP addresses is now automatically managed at the database level to greatly improve performance especially when calculating tree hierarchy and utilization.

| Removed                | Replaced With   |
| ---------------------- | --------------- |

> | `get_child_prefixes()` | `descendants()` |

Reviewer: This is a Prefix API, not an IPAddress API, right? Seems out of place in this section.

Author: Hmm yeah weird copy pasta. I suppose.

#### IPAddress Parenting Guidance

The following guidance has been added to the `IPAddress` model:

- An `IPAddress` should have a parent `Prefix` of type `Network`
- An `IPAddress` should not be created if a suitable parent `Prefix` of type `Network` does not exist
- An `IPAddress` can be a member of a `Pool` but only if the `Pool` is a child of a `Network`
- If an eligible parent `Prefix` cannot be found for an `IPAddress` in a given `Namespace`, creation or update of that `IPAddress` will fail.

> - If deleting a parent `Prefix` would result in any child `IPAddress` objects to become orphaned, the delete opration will fail.

Reviewer: These last two items are enforced even in 2.0, right?

Author: Yes.

As with the [`Prefix` parenting guidance](#prefix-parenting-guidance) above, violating this guidance in Nautobot 2.0 will result in a warning; in a future Nautobot release this will be changed to an enforced data constraint.

### Parenting affinity during the upgrade

A best effort is made to keep `Prefixes` and `IPAddresses` together by shared attributes such as Tenant, but this is not alway possible for various reasons such as numerous duplicate with identical or too-closely-similar criteria.

When identifying possible ancestors for child `Prefix` or `IPAddress` objects during the reparenting phase of the upgrade process, the following sets of attributes will be compared in order:

- `Tenant` assigned, `VRF` assigned
- `Tenant` null, `VRF` assigned
- `Tenant` assigned, `VRF` null
- `VRF` assigned
- `Tenant` null, `VRF` null
- `VRF` null

> - Default ordering

Reviewer: I don't have specific suggestions at the moment for this section but it "feels" not directly useful to the user to me. Maybe some concrete examples might help?

Reviewer 2: Here's the relevant code for reference:

```py
                models.When(tenant=obj.tenant, vrf=obj.vrf, then=models.Value(1)), 
                models.When(tenant__isnull=True, vrf=obj.vrf, then=models.Value(2)), 
                models.When(tenant=obj.tenant, vrf__isnull=True, then=models.Value(3)),
                models.When(vrf=obj.vrf, then=models.Value(4)),
                models.When(tenant__isnull=True, vrf__isnull=True, then=models.Value(5)),
                models.When(vrf__isnull=True, then=models.Value(6)),
                default=models.Value(7),
```

Maybe something like this?

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    8[Prefix 10.0.0.0/8]
    8 --> 24BlueA[Prefix 10.0.0.0/24<br>VRF <font color=00BBFF>Blue</font><br>Tenant A] --> IPBlueA[IPAddress 10.1.1.1<br>VRF <font color=00BBFF>Blue</font><br>Tenant A<br><br><i>Prefer matching tenant and VRF</i>]
    8 --> 24BlueNone[Prefix 10.0.0.0/24<br>VRF <font color=00BBFF>Blue</font><br>Tenant None]  --> IPBlueB[IPAddress 10.1.1.1<br>VRF <font color=00BBFF>Blue</font><br>Tenant B<br><br><i>Prefer matching VRF with null tenant<br>before different tenant</i>]
    8 --> 24NoneB[Prefix 10.0.0.0/24<br>VRF None<br>Tenant B] --> IPGreenB[IPAddress 10.1.1.1<br>VRF <font color=66FF66>Green</font><br>Tenant B<br><br><i>Prefer matching tenant with null VRF<br>before different VRF</i>]
    8 --> 24RedB[Prefix 10.0.0.0/24<br>VRF <font color=red>Red</font><br>Tenant B]  --> IPRedA[IPAddress 10.1.1.1<br>VRF <font color=red>Red</font><br>Tenant A<br><br><i>Prefer matching VRF if no suitable match<br>can be found with matching or null tenant</i>]
    8 --> 24NoneNone[Prefix 10.0.0.0/24<br>VRF None<br>Tenant None] --> IPYellowY[IPAddress 10.1.1.1<br>VRF <font color=FFFF00>Yellow</font><br>Tenant Y<br><br><i>Prefer null VRF if no suitable match<br>can be found with either<br>matching tenant,<br>matching VRF,<br>or both null VRF and tenant</i>]
```

### IPAddress to VRF relationships were changed

> - VRF removed; now inherited from parent Prefix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `IPAddress.vrf` foreign-key has been removed; now inherited from parent Prefix
```

- Constraints for assignment to Interfaces with VRF
    - If the VRF has no Prefixes assigned, IPAddresses may freely be assigned
    - If the VRF has Prefixes assigned, only child IPAddresses of those Prefixes may be assigned

### VRF is no longer used for uniqueness

- The `rd` field must unique to each Namespace
- Relationship from Prefix inverted; now many Prefixes can be assigned to one or more VRF in the same Namespace

> - One ore mor Devices now be assigned to a VRF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One or more Devices can now be assigned to a VRF
```

    - A VRF must be assigned to a Device before it may be assigned to an Interface/VMInterface

### IPAddress to Interface relationship was inverted

> This also applies to `VMInterface` objects

In Nautobot 1.x the relationship from an IPAddress to an Interface was done by way of a foreign key to `Interface` on the `IPAddress` object. This implementation was flawed in that if a need arose to assign the same IP address host value to multiple Interfaces, it required the creation of duplicate `IPAddress` objects with the same `host` address in order to assign each one to a different `Interface`.

> As of Nautobot 2.0, this relationships was inverted. Now an `Interface` has a many-to-many relationship to `IPAddresses`. This allows the same `IPAddress` object to be assigned to multiple `Interface` objects without the need to create duplicate `IPAdress` objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of Nautobot 2.0, this relationships was inverted. Now an `Interface` has a many-to-many relationship to `IPAddresses`. This allows the same `IPAddress` object to be assigned to multiple `Interface` objects without the need to create duplicate `IPAddress` objects.
```

### VRF is now assigned to Interface/VMInterface, not IPAddress

- A new foreign key to `VRF` has been introduced to `Interface/VMInterface`
    - A`VRF` must be assigned to a `Device` before it may be assigned to an `Interface`
    - A`VRF` must be assigned to a `VirtualMachine` before it may be assigned to an `VMInterface`
- This addresses a fundamental flaw in which an Interface could have multiple IPAddresses assigned with conflicting VRFs, which is impossible in practice.

### Primary IPv4/IPv6 no longer unique

- [#3939](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/issues/3939) - Changed `Device.primary_ip4` and `primary_ip6` fields from `OneToOneField`to `ForeignKey`, relaxing the uniqueness constraint.
- [#3939](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/issues/3939) - Changed `VirtualMachine.primary_ip4` and `primary_ip6` fields from `OneToOneField` to `ForeignKey`, relaxing the uniqueness constraint.

> - Because now same IP used in multiple places requires this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This was required in order to allow multiple Devices or VirtualMachines to share a (non-duplicated) primary IPAddress record.
```

> ## Preparing your IPAM Data for Nautobot 2.0

Reviewer: Somewhere here would be good to add a note about running the pre-migration helper management command(s) in 1.x.

Author: Yes, indeed!

- IPaddress VRF assignments must be unique
- Parents and IPAddresses must share the same Namespace

> - IPAddress objects can no longer be orphaned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- IPAddress objects can no longer be "orphaned" (having no corresponding parent Prefix)
```

    - The database migration will automatically create a parent prefix for IPAddresses that do not have an eligible parent. For example 1.2.3.4/32 will have a parent Prefix created of the same network and prefix_length e.g. 1.2.3.4/32.
    - If you do not wish for these single host prefixes to be created, create a parent prefix of your desired size to contain them before upgrading
- You cannot migrate Interfaces or VMInterfaces that have IPs with differing VRFs

>     - Make sure for interfaces with multiple IPs that each IP assigned to the same Interface share the same VRF or are not assigned a VRF

Reviewer: I know this is WIP but as a suggestion it might be good to add "before/bad" and "after/corrected" examples for each of these?

### Cleanup Namespaces

> This also applies to any "VRF Namespace" objects that were created.

A priority of the upgrade process is to assert that no data will be lost. Due to the introduction of strict uniqueness constraints to disallow duplicate Prefix, IPAddress, and VRF objects within the same Namespace.

- If you need to swap an object into another Namespace (say Global and Cleanup Namespace 1)
    - Create a third "Temporary" namespace
    - Move objects from Global to Temporary
    - Move objects from Cleanup Namespace 1 to Global
    - Move objects from Temporary to Cleanup Namespace 1
    - Delete Temporary
- Tenant affinity
    - A best effort is made to keep Prefixes and IPAddresses together by shared attributes such as tenant, but this is not alway possible for various reasons such as numerous duplicate with identical or too-closely-similar criteria.

### Delete duplicate objects

- No data loss is prioritized, therefore some objects that may have been duplicates before, may no longer be needed. Some examples include:
    - The same IP assigned to multple interfaces. Where possible, a single IP is now assigned

>     - VRFs that were used strictly for custom uniqueness boundaries

Reviewer: Suggest adding a note/cross-reference here to the docs about the IPAddress merge tool.

# Nautobot 2.0 IPAM Migration Guide

## Goal

> This document aims to answer the question “What do I need to do to my data (or what changes with my data) when migrating to 2.0, specifically IPAM?”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document aims to answer the question "What do I need to do to my data (or what changes with my data) when migrating to 2.0, specifically IPAM?"
```

How did curly quotes get in there?

Author: Copypasta from GitHub perhaps?

Author: I am now!

## What Changed

This section details the high-level changes as it relates to the data modeling for IPAM objects. Some of the sections are repeating content found in the release notes with detail added for improved readability. Additionally, not all changes described will be distinctly related to IPAM, but if there were changes to relationships to or from IPAM data models, the impact of those changes will be described here.

### Namespaces were introduced

> The new `Namespace` model expands on the functionality previously provided by `VRF.enforce_unique` and the `ENFORCE_GLOBAL_UNIQUE` setting, both of which have now been removed. Within a Namespace, all VRFs, Prefixes, and IP addresses must be unique. This enables greater flexibility in managing discrete duplicate `VRF`, `Prefix` or `IPAddress` objects, asserting that each set of duplicates will be in a distinct `Namespace`.

Reviewer 2: > This enables greater flexibility in managing discrete duplicate `VRF`, `Prefix` or `IPAddress` objects, asserting that each set of duplicates will be in a distinct `Namespace`.

I don't have a good suggestion here but I don't feel that this explains how or why namespaces are making managing duplicates more flexible. Perhaps state the equivalence of namespaces to distinct layer 3 routing tables and add that we've correct previous modeling that required duplicate IPs/Prefixes/VRFs?

Author: Namespaces are functionally equivalent to distinct layer 3 routing tables. The introduction of Namespaces corrects previous modeling that required duplicate `IPAddress`, `Prefix`, and `VRF` objects. The ultimate goal of Namespaces is to enable greater flexibility in managing discrete duplicate `VRF`, `Prefix` or `IPAddress` objects, asserting that any set of duplicates objects will no longer be necessary by way of the core data model itself and instead becomes an intuitive way to explicitly manage duplicate IPAM objects within distinct `Namespaces`.

🤷‍♂️

For more details please refer to the [Namespace model documentation](../../../core-data-model/ipam/namespace.md).

### Default Namespace

> A default `Namespace` object named "Global" wil be created for you. All objects that did not have duplicates found will be found in this Namespace. All new objects will default to this Namespace unless otherwise specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A default `Namespace` object named "Global" will be created for you. All objects that did not have duplicates found will be found in this Namespace. All new objects will default to this Namespace unless otherwise specified.
```

For example, the very first duplicate `Prefix` found will be moved to a Namespace named "Cleanup Namespace 1". For each pass that identifies a duplicate of an object in an existing Namespace, new Namespaces will be created by incrementing the number resulting in "Cleanup Namespace 2", "Cleanup Namespace 3", etc.

#### VRF Namespaces

For `VRF` objects that had `enforce_unique` enabled with `Prefixes` assigned to them, any child `Prefixes` or child `IPAddresses` of those `Prefixes` will be moved to a "VRF Namespace" with the name of the `VRF` included.

For example, if the `VRF` is named "Blue" and has `Prefixes` assigned to it, the `VRF`, all `Prefixes` assigned to it, and any child `Prefixes` or `IPAddresses` will be moved to a new `Namespace` with the name "VRF Namespace Blue".

### Aggregate model was merged into Prefix

> The `Aggregate` model will be removed and all existing aggregates will be migrated to `Prefix` with type set to `Container`. The `Aggregate.date_added` field will be migrated to `Prefix.date_allocated` and changed from a `Date` field to a `DateTime` field with the time set to `00:00`. The fields `Aggregate.tenant`, `Aggregate.rir`, and `Aggregate.description` will be migrated over to the same fields on `Prefix`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Aggregate` model was removed and all existing aggregates will be migrated to `Prefix` with type set to `Container`. The `Aggregate.date_added` field will be migrated to `Prefix.date_allocated` and changed from a `Date` field to a `DateTime` field with the time set to `00:00`. The fields `Aggregate.tenant`, `Aggregate.rir`, and `Aggregate.description` will be migrated over to the same fields on `Prefix`.
```

See the [upgrade guide](./upgrading-from-nautobot-v1.md#aggregate-migrated-to-prefix) for more details on the data migration.

### Role model is now Generic across Nautobot

> The `DeviceRole`, `RackRole`, `ipam.Role`, and `IPAddressRoleChoices` have all been removed and replaced with a `extras.Role` model, This means that all references to any of the replaced models and choices now points to this generic `Role` model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `DeviceRole`, `RackRole`, `ipam.Role`, and `IPAddressRoleChoices` have all been removed and replaced with an `extras.Role` model. This means that all references to any of the replaced models and choices now points to this generic `Role` model.
```

In addition, the `role` field of the `IPAddress` model will be changed from a choice field to a foreign key field related to the `extras.Role` model.

For more details please refer to the [documention on Roles](../../../platform-functionality/role.md).

### Prefix Parenting Concrete Relationship was added

> The `Prefix` model wil be modified to have a self-referencing foreign key as the `parent` field. Parenting of prefixes is now automatically managed at the database level to greatly improve performance especially when calculating tree hierarchy and utilization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Prefix` model was modified to have a self-referencing foreign key as the `parent` field. Parenting of prefixes is now automatically managed at the database level to greatly improve performance especially when calculating tree hierarchy and utilization.
```

#### Prefix Parenting Guidance

The following guidance has been added for the `Prefix` model in order to ensure more accurate network modeling:

- A `Prefix` of type `Container` should only have a parent (if any) of type `Container`
- A `Prefix` of type `Network` should only have a parent (if any) of type `Container`
- A `Prefix` of type `Pool` should only have a parent (if any) of type `Network`
- Any `Prefix` can be a root prefix (i.e. have no parent)

In Nautobot 2.0, creating or updating prefixes that violate this guidance will result in a warning; in a future Nautobot release this will be changed to an enforced data constraint.

### Prefix.is_pool field and "Container" status replaced by new field Prefix.type

A new type field was added to `Prefix` to replace the `is_pool` boolean field and the "Container" `status`. The `type` field can be set to "Network", "Pool" or "Container", with "Network" being the default.

> Existing `Prefixes` with a `status` of "Container" will be migrated to the "Container" `type`. Existing prefixes with `is_pool` set is migrated to the "Pool" `type`. Prefixes with both `is_pool set` and a `status` of "Container" are migrated to the "Pool" `type`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Existing `Prefixes` with a `status` of "Container" will be migrated to the "Container" `type`. Existing prefixes with `is_pool` set are migrated to the "Pool" `type`. Prefixes with both `is_pool set` and a `status` of "Container" are migrated to the "Pool" `type`.
```

        - 192.168.2.0/30  `Pool - 1/4 utilization`
            - 192.168.2.1 `IP Address`
    - 192.168.3.0/24      `Network - 5/254 utilization`
        - 192.168.3.1     `IP Address`
        - 192.168.3.64/30 `Pool - 0/4 utilization`
    - 192.168.4.0/24      `Network - 1/256 utilization`
        - 192.168.4.255   `IP Address`

### IPAddress Parenting Concrete Relationship was added

The `ipam.IPAddress` model has been modified to have a mandatory foreign key to `ipam.Prefix` as the `parent` field. Parenting of IP addresses is now automatically managed at the database level to greatly improve performance especially when calculating tree hierarchy and utilization.

#### IPAddress Parenting Guidance

The following guidance has been added to the `IPAddress` model:

- An `IPAddress` should have a parent `Prefix` of type `Network`
- An `IPAddress` should not be created if a suitable parent `Prefix` of type `Network` does not exist
- An `IPAddress` can be a member of a `Pool` but only if the `Pool` is a child of a `Network`
- If an eligible parent `Prefix` cannot be found for an `IPAddress` in a given `Namespace`, creation or update of that `IPAddress` will fail.

> - If deleting a parent `Prefix` would result in any child `IPAddress` objects to become orphaned, the delete opration will fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If deleting a parent `Prefix` would result in any child `IPAddress` objects to become orphaned, the delete operation will fail.
```

The foreign key relationship from `Prefix` to `VRF` has been inverted and replaced with a many-to-many relationship from `VRF` to `Prefix`. Now each `Prefix` can be assigned to one or more `VRF` object in the same `Namespace`.

Lastly, one or more `Device`/`VirtualMachine` objects can now be assigned to a `VRF`. A `VRF` must be assigned to a `Device`/`VirtualMachine` before it may be assigned to an `Interface`/`VMInterface`. This is the modeling equivalent of creating a `VRF` in the device configuration before it may be used on an interface.

### IPAddress to Interface relationship was inverted

In Nautobot 1.x the relationship from an `IPAddress` to an `Interface`/`VMInterface` was done by way of a foreign key to `Interface`/`VMInterface` on the `IPAddress` object. This implementation was flawed in that if a need arose to assign the same IP address to multiple interfaces, it required the creation of duplicate `IPAddress` objects with the same `host` address in order to assign each one to a different `Interface`/`VMInterface`.

> As of Nautobot 2.0, this relationships was inverted. Now an `Interface`/`VMInterface` has a many-to-many relationship to `IPAddresses`. This allows the same `IPAddress` object to be assigned to multiple `Interface`/`VMInterface` objects without the need to create duplicate `IPAdress` objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of Nautobot 2.0, this relationship was inverted. Now an `Interface`/`VMInterface` has a many-to-many relationship to `IPAddresses`. This allows the same `IPAddress` object to be assigned to multiple `Interface`/`VMInterface` objects without the need to create duplicate `IPAdress` objects.
```

### VRF is now assigned to Interface/VMInterface, not IPAddress

A new foreign key to `VRF` has been introduced to `Interface/VMInterface`.

- A `VRF` must be assigned to a `Device` before it may be assigned to an `Interface`
- A `VRF` must be assigned to a `VirtualMachine` before it may be assigned to an `VMInterface`

This addresses a fundamental flaw in which an Interface could have multiple `IPAddress` objects assigned with conflicting `VRFs`, which is impossible in practice when applied to a network device configuration.

### Primary IPv4/IPv6 no longer unique

> On `Device` and `VirtualMachin`e objects, the `primary_ip4` and `primary_ip6` fields were changed from a one-to-one field--which is a foreign key with a uniqueness constraint--to a foreign key, dropping the uniquness constraint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On `Device` and `VirtualMachine` objects, the `primary_ip4` and `primary_ip6` fields were changed from a one-to-one field--which is a foreign key with a uniqueness constraint--to a foreign key, dropping the uniqueness constraint.
```

Parent `Prefixes`, child `Prefixes`, and `IPAddresses` must share the same `Namespace` and any case for duplicate `Prefix`/`IPAddress` must involve leveraging distinct `Namespace` objects.

If you need to maintain duplicates for any reason, assert that each set of duplicate objects are assigned to a distinct `VRF` with `enforce_unique` set to `True`, as during the upgrade process these will each be moved to their own "VRF Namespace" (Please see the section on **VRF Namespaces** above).

### IPAddress objects can no longer be orphaned

The database migration will automatically create a parent `Prefix` for `IPAddresses` that do not have an eligible parent. For example an `IPAddress` with address of `1.2.3.4/32` will have a parent `Prefix` created of the same `network` and `prefix_length` e.g. `1.2.3.4/32`.

If you do not wish for these single-host `Prefixes` to be created, create a parent `Prefix` of your desired size to contain any would-be orphaned `IPAddresses` before upgrading.

## After you Upgrade

This section includes various things to consider after you have successfully upgraded Nautobot.

### Review any Cleanup Namespaces

> > This may also apply to any "VRF Namespace" objects that were created, depending on your requirements on maintaining duplicate Prefix/IPAddress objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> This may also apply to any "VRF Namespace" objects that were created, depending on your requirements for maintaining duplicate Prefix/IPAddress objects.
```

A priority of the upgrade process is to assert that no data will be lost. Due to the introduction of strict uniqueness constraints to disallow duplicate `Prefix`, `IPAddress`, and `VRF` objects within the same `Namespace`.

#### A word on Tenant affinity

> A best effort is made to keep `Prefixes` and `IPAddresses` together in the same `Namespace` by shared attributes such as `Tenant`, but this is not alway possible for various reasons such as numerous duplicate with identical or too-closely-similar criteria.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A best effort is made to keep `Prefixes` and `IPAddresses` together in the same `Namespace` by shared attributes such as `Tenant`, but this is not always possible for various reasons such as numerous duplicates with identical or too-closely-similar criteria.
```

- Next, edit any desired objects you want to swap in objects from the "Global" Namespace and update their Namespace to "Temporary"
    - After performing this step, there should be no duplicates found in the "Global" Namespace
- Next, edit the duplicate objects you want moved in from "Cleanup Namespace 1" and set their Namespace to "Global".
    - After performing this step there should be no duplicates found in the "Cleanup Namespace 1" Namespace, as they've been moved to "Global"
- Finally, edit the original objects found in the "Temporary" Namespace that were moved from "Global" to "Temporary" and set their Namespace "Cleanup Namespace 1"
    - After performing this final step, the duplicate objects that were originally in the "Global" have now been swapped with those that were originally in the "Cleanup Namespace 1" Namespace.
    - There are no no duplicate objects found in the "Temporary" Namespace. This Namespace can safely be deleted.
- Delete the "Temporary" Namespace when done.

### Delete duplicate objects

Because preventing data loss is prioritized, some objects that may have been required to be duplicates before may no longer be needed.

Some examples include:

> - The same `IPAddress` assigned to multple `Interfaces/VMInterfaces`. Where possible, a single `IPAddress` is now assigned leaving duplicate objects across other Namespaces to be potentially no longer necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The same `IPAddress` assigned to multiple `Interfaces/VMInterfaces`. Where possible, a single `IPAddress` is now assigned leaving duplicate objects across other Namespaces to be potentially no longer necessary.
```

| VLAN        | available_on_device | Filtering on multiple values         |
| VLAN        | tenant              | Filter by UUID or by name            |
| VLAN        | tenant_group        | Filter by UUID or by name            |
| VLAN        | vlan_group          | Filter by UUID or by name            |
| VRF         | tenant              | Filter by UUID or by name            |
| VRF         | tenant_group        | Filter by UUID or by name            |

### Corrected Filter Fields

Below is a table documenting [corrected filter field changes](https://docs.nautobot.com/projects/core/en/next/release-notes/version-2.0/#corrected-filter-fields-2804) in Nautobot 2.0. These corrections mostly involve filters that previously permitted filtering on related membership only (`/api/dcim/devices/?console_ports=True`) and have now been corrected into filters for related membership (`/api/dcim/devices/?has_console_ports=True`) as well as by actual related objects (`/api/dcim/devices/?console_ports=<UUID>`).

| Model     | Filter | Correction                                                   |
| :-------- | :----- | :----------------------------------------------------------- |

> | IPAddress | parent | The `parent` filter now checks for an exact match of the parent Prefix; for legacy `net_host_contained`behavior now use the new `prefix` filter instead |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| IPAddress | parent | The `parent` filter now checks for an exact match of the parent Prefix; for legacy `net_host_contained` behavior now use the new `prefix` filter instead |
```

### Removed Filter Fields

Below is a table documenting [removed filter field changes](https://docs.nautobot.com/projects/core/en/next/release-notes/version-2.0/#removed-filter-fields-2804) in v2.x. Most removed database fields in Nautobot 2.0 fall into the following general categories:

1. Removal of `*_id=<uuid>` filters as they have have been merged into filters that support both uuid and name/slug (for example, instead of `/api/circuits/circuits/?provider_id=<UUID>`, use `/api/circuits/circuits/?provider=<uuid>`).

> 2. Removal of filtering on removed models such as `Region` and `Site`. (Use `location`filters instead.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Removal of filtering on removed models such as `Region` and `Site`. (Use `location` filters instead.)
```
